(Originally posted at http://forum.stunts.hu/index.php?topic=3635.0)

For a long while, one of my favourite Stunts investigation topics has been the
evaluation of race strength, be it merely for the enjoyment of historians and
pundits, or to inform some kind of spiritual successor to
[url=https://digilander.libero.it/stunts.SDR/SWR/SWR.htm]Mark L. Rivers' SWR
Ranking[/url]. Some of you might even remember
[url=http://forum.stunts.hu/index.php?topic=2735.0]my 2012 thread on the
matter[/url]. Now, after a long time with this project in the back burner, I
have made enough progress to feel like posting about it again. So, without
further ado, here is a plot of race strengths covering the 236 ZakStunts races
so far:

[img width=1024]https://i.imgur.com/st3JfQl.png[/img]

(Attached below is the Excel file this chart belongs to, so you can have a
closer look at the data.)

While this chart might look rather like
[url=http://forum.stunts.hu/index.php?topic=2735.msg67944#msg67944]the ones I
shown you years ago[/url], there is one major difference: this time, a clearer
procedure to obtain the data has led to values that are meaningful on their
own. For instance, consider the massive spike you see just left of the middle
of the chart. That is [url=http://zak.stunts.hu/tracks/ZCT100]ZCT100[/url],
whose strength is around 70. According to the model underpinning the
calculations, that number means a racer of Elo rating 1500 (which generally
amounts to lower midfield) would, if they joined ZCT100, have a 1 in 70 chance
of reaching a top five result on the scoreboard.

The numbers here aren't definitive yet, as I still want to check whether there
is any useful tuning of parameters to be done, as well as to figure out how to
estimate some of the involved uncertainties. In any case, I believe they look
fairly reasonable. Within each season, the ranking of races is generally very
sensible. Comparing different eras of ZakStunts is, as one might expect,
trickier. In particular, I feel the model might be overrating the 2010 races a
little bit. Also, it is hard to tell whether the model underrates races from
the first few seasons (2001-2004) as it moves towards a steadier state. Still,
the chart does seem to capture the evolutionary arcs of ZakStunts: a steady
increase in the level of the competition over the initial years, culminating in
the 2005-2006 high plateau, followed by a sharp drop in 2007, and so forth.

[hr]

I will now outline how this new strength estimation works. Some of what follows
might be of interest beyond mere technical curiosity, for parts of the
procedure can be useful for other investigations in Stunts analytics.

(By the way, you can check [url=https://github.com/duplode/elo-zs]the source
code of my program[/url] on GitHub, if you are so inclined.)

When I set about resuming this investigation early this year, I decided to,
instead of rolling yet another quirky algorithm from scratch, start from
well-understood building blocks, so that, if nothing else, I would get
something intelligible at the end. Balancing that principle with the known
limitations of my chosen methods (and there are quite a few of them), I
eventually ended up with the following pipeline of computations:

[list type=decimal] [li]From the ZakStunts results, compute
[url=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elo_rating_system][b]Elo ratings[/b][/url]
at every race.[/li] [li]Obtain, from the Elo ratings, victory probabilities
against a hypothetical 1800-rated racer, and use those probabilities to
parameterise a rough [b]performance model[/b], which amounts to the probability
distribution of lap times (relative to an ideal lap) for a racer.[/li] [li]Use
the performance model to implement a [b]race result simulator[/b], which spits
out possible outcomes when given a list of racers and their ratings.[/li]
[li]Add a ficticious 1500-rated racer to the list of race entrants, and run the
simulation enough times to be able to give [b]a reasonable estimate of the
likelihood of a top 5 finish[/b] by the ficticious racer.[/li] [/list]

(Implicit in the above is that my code includes both a Elo rating calculator
and a race result simulator, which can be put to use in other contexts with
minimal effort.)

Let's look at each step a little closer. When it comes to ratings of
competitors, [b]Elo ratings[/b] are a pretty much universal starting point.
They are mathematically simple and very well understood, which was a big plus
given the plan I had at the outset. For our current purposes, though, the Elo
system has one major disadvantage: it is designed for one-versus-one matches,
and not for races. While it is certainly possible to approach a race as if it
were the collection of all [i]N*(N-1)/2[/i] head-to-head matchups among the
involved racers, doing so disregards how the actual head-to-head comparisons
are correlated with each other, as they all depend on the [i]N[/i] racer
laptimes. (To put it in another way: if you beat, say, FinRok in a race, that
means you have achieved a laptime good enough to beat FinRok, and so such a
laptime will likely be good enough to defeat most other racers.) All that
correlation means there will be a lot of redundant information in the matchups,
the practical consequence being that a single listfiller or otherwise atypical
result can cause wild swings in a racer's rating. Trying to solve the problem
by discarding most of the matchups (say, by only comparing a racer with their
neighbours on the scoreboard) doesn't work well either: since we only have ~12
races a year to get data out of, that approach will make the ratings evolve too
slowly to be of any use. Eventually, I settled for a compromise of only using
matchups up to six positions away on the scoreboard (in either direction),
which at least curtails some of the worst distortions in races with 20+
entrants. Besides that, my use of the Elo system is pretty standard. While new
racers are handled specially over their initial five races for the sake of
fairer comparisons and faster steadying of ratings, that is not outside the
norm (for instance, chess tournaments generally take similar measures).

Elo ratings are not enough to simulate race results, precisely because of the
distinction between a collection of matchups and a single race discussed above.
A simulation requires a [b]model of the racer performance[/b], so that
individual simulated results for each racer can be put together in a
scoreboard. One workaround to bridge this gap relies on victory probabilities.
It is possible, given Elo ratings for a pair of racers, to calculate how likely
one is to defeat the other in a matchup. Similarly, if you have the laptime
probability distributions for a pair of racers, you can calculate how likely it
is for one of them to be faster than the other. A few seat-of-the-pants
assumptions later, we have a way to conjure a laptime probability distribution
that corresponds to an Elo rating. As for the distributions, the ones I am
using look like this:

[img width=1024]https://i.imgur.com/mbhvmpo.png[/img]

This is a really primitive model, perhaps the simplest thing that could
possibly work. It is simple enough that there are victory probability formulas
that can be calculated with pen and paper. There is just one racer-dependent
parameter. As said parameter increases, the distribution is compressed towards
zero (the ideal laptime), which implies laptimes that are typically faster and
obtained more consistently (in the plot above, the parameter is 1 for the blue
curve and 2 for the red one). While I haven't seriously attempted to validate
the model empirically, the features it does have match some of the intuition
about laptimes. (On the matter empirical validation, one might conceivably
[url=http://forum.stunts.hu/index.php?topic=18.msg50237#msg50237]drive five
laps on Default[/url] every day for a month and see how the resulting laptimes
are spread. That would be a very interesting experiment, though for our
immediate purposes the differences between RH and NoRH might become a
confounding factor.)

Having the laptime distributions for all entrants in a race makes it possible
to figure out a formula that can be used to, in principle, numerically compute
victory and [b]top-n probabilities[/b] against its set of racers. In practice,
though, it turns out that victory probabilities aren't a good race strength
metric, as the results tend to be largely determined by a small handful of
racers with very high ratings. Furthermore, with this approach top-n
probabilities quickly become too computationally expensive as [i]n[/i] grows
(for the number of integrals to be numerically calculated grows
combinatorially). For top-5 probabilities, which to my eyes look like the sweet
spot for strength estimation, it is cheaper to use the distributions to
[b]simulate the races[/b] and afterwards check how often top-5 results happen.
That is the case even though a lot of runs are needed to get solid results.
While I will try to better clarify how much "a lot" is, for now it seems that
100,000 runs per race are a reasonable starting point. That means twenty three
million and six hundred thousand runs to cover all ZakStunts racers. My laptop
took fifteen and a half minutes to perform them yesterday, ultimately resulting
in the chart at the top of the post.

[hr]

To turn the discussion back to sporting matters, the troubles with wild rating
swings and outlier results alluded to above brought me back to the question of
listfillers,
[url=http://forum.stunts.hu/index.php?topic=2735.msg49468#msg49468]already
raised by Bonzai Joe all those years ago[/url]. Left unchecked, a particularly
weak listfiller in a busy race can wreck havoc upon the Elo rating of its
unfortunate author. That ultimately compelled me to look for objective criteria
according to which at least some of the obvious listfillers can be exclued. For
the current purposes, I ultimately settled on the following three rules:

[list type=decimal] [li]Results above 300% of the winning time [i]and[/i] more
than two standard deviations away from the average of laptimes are to be
excluded. (The Bonzai Joe rule.)[/li] [li]GAR and NoRH replays are only counted
if the fastest lap on the parallel scoreboard they belong to is, or would be,
above the bottom quarter (rounding towards the top) of the scoreboard. (The
Marco rule.)[/li] [li]For our current purposes, a car is deemed "competitive"
if it can be found above the bottom quarter (rounding towards the top) of the
scoreboard, [i]or[/i] if it was used to defeat a racer using a competitive car
whose lap was not excluded according to the previous two rules. Only laps
driven with competitive cars count. (The Alan Rotoi rule).[/li] [/list]

These rules were applied to the full list of ZakStunts race entries that I'm
using (it was one of those quarantine days back in May). Disqualified race
results were also removed; there were a few curious findings in that respect I
should write about one of these days. (By the way, ghosts are not included in
the calculations, regardless of what their race entries look like.)

(A footnote: the bar for applying the first rule above looks, at first,
incredibly low. I considered using a lower percentage, like 250%, and would
rather not have the frankly bizarre standard deviation additional condition. It
turns out, however, that ZCT029, a difficult dual-way full Vette PG track from
2003, had an extraordinarily broad spectrum of laptimes, including several
racers with non-listfiller laps beyond the 300% cutoff which would have been
excluded without the standard deviation test. Faced with such a peculiar
scoreboard, I opted to err on the side of circumspection.)

It remains a tall order to find objective criteria to discard listfillers that
won't exclude too many proper competitive laps as a collateral effect.
Ultimately, if we were to establish new racer rankings I suspect different use
cases would call for different kinds of ratings. An Elo-like ranking is
appropriate for race strength estimations, simulations and predictions, when
what is needed is a picture of how well someone is racing at a specific moment
in time. For comparing performances within the last several months, though, a
ranking of weighed (for instance, by recency or race strengths) race scores
within a time window, in the style of SWR, might prove more appropriate. With
this kind of ranking, it becomes reasonable to have, for instance,
ZakStunts-style worst results discards, which could definitely help dealing
with listfillers.

Anyway, by now I probably should stop rambling, at least for a little while :D
Questions, comments, criticism, suggestions about the metric and ideas on cool
stuff to do with those algorithms are all welcome!
